---
title: 'Scientists as Detectives: HIV in North America'
date: '2016-12-15 17:01:00 -07:00'
author: Shelby Prestwich
---

Detectives and scientists have similar jobs: they have to solve a problem with evidence and convince people that they came to the right conclusions.  Detectives have to convince a judge or jury; scientists have to convince other scientists.  For both the scientists and the detectives, the only way to convince someone is to have the right conclusions supported by evidence.  But people don't like to be wrong.  They don't want to change their minds.  If they already believe something and it makes sense in their minds, why change?  This is one challenge [Worobey et al] (http://www.nature.com/nature/journal/v539/n7627/full/nature19827.html) had when they began to tackle the challenge of how the Human Immunodeficiency Virus (HIV) came to North America.

To understand why a crime was committed, detectives look at the back story of many people involved.  This helps give them insight to persons of interest and the crime itself.  The same is true for scientists.  Worobey et al needed to know about both the HIV virus itself and it's history to know more about how it was transmitted to North America.

The first acknowledgement that HIV was in North America was in 1981 when the CDC published a [Morbidity and Mortality Weekly Report] (https://www.cdc.gov/mmwr/preview/mmwrhtml/june_5.htm).  The report stated that the amounts of [Pneumocystis Jiroveci Pneumonia (PCP)] (https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Pneumocystis_pneumonia) and [Kaposi Sarcoma (KS)] (https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Kaposi%27s_sarcoma) in gay men in California and New York was abnormally high.  A [task force on Kaposi's Sarcoma and Opportunistic Infections] (https://history.nih.gov/nihinownwords/docs/curran1_02.html) was put together "to identify risk factors and to develop a case definition for national surveillance" ([aids.gov] (https://www.aids.gov/hiv-aids-basics/hiv-aids-101/aids-timeline/)).  People with these diseases became negatively viewed by the general public, even as far as called these diseases "gay cancer."  In 1982, the CDC first uses the term [Acquired Immune Deficiency Syndrome (AIDS)] (https://www.cdc.gov/hiv/default.html/) and defines it as a "disease, at least moderately predictive of a defect in cell-mediated immunity, occurring in a person with no known cause for diminished reistance to that disease."  It's not until 1983 that the major transmission routes of the virus causing AIDS is known and the next year that the retrovirus causing AIDS is discovered,  In 1985 blood banks begin screening for this new retrovirus.  It isn't until 1986 that this virus is officially named the Human Immunodeficiency Virus (HIV).

[HIV] (https://www.cdc.gov/hiv/default.html/) is a retrovirus that weakens the immune system by destroying cells that fight disease and infection.  There is currently no cure but the virus can be controlled through medication.  There are three stages of HIV.  The first stage is acute infection, where a person exhibits flu-like symptoms with 2-4 weeks after infection.  There are large amounts of virus in the body and these people are very contagious and usually unaware of the infection.  Clinical latency, the second stage, is where the HIV virus is dormant but still reproducing at low levels.  Infected persons may not have symptoms but they can still transmit the virus to others.  At the end of this stage, the virus increases and the amount of infection fighting cells decrease.  When the virus increases to a certain point and infection fighting cells fall below a threshold of 200 cells/mm, the individual has moved into the third stage, AIDS.  In this stage, a person is very infectious.  Opportunistic  infections, or uncommon infections that take advantage of a weakened immune system, are common in individuals with AIDS.

HIV can only be transmitted through certain body fluids (blood, semen, pre-seminal fluid, rectal fluids, vaginal fluids, or breast milk) of an infected person coming in contact with mucous membrane (the lining of the nose, mouth, airway, esophagus, stomach, intestines, penis, or vagina) or damaged tissue or bloodstream of another person.  In the United States, HIV is mostly spread by having sex without a condom and sharing needles or syringes to inject drugs.  There are other ways HIV can be transmitted but they are less common.

One controversy Worobey et al had to acknowledge was that a majority of people believed HIV came to North America because of an individual known as [Patient 0] (https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Ga%C3%ABtan_Dugas). Patient 0, whose real name was Gaetan Dugas, was a homosexual French-Canadian flight attendant.  He was part of the study on KS.  He admitted to having multiple sexual partners and helped researchers in tracing his network of partners.  Dugas was unique from other individuals in the study because they could not remember or name their partners.  Dugas was featured in Randy Shilt's book [*And the Band Played On: Politics, People, and the AIDS Epidemic*] (https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/And_the_Band_Played_On) as someone who knowingly and intentionally spread the HIV virus to others.  After the book was published, many people believed that Dugas was the source of HIV in North America.  He had means to pick up the virus from another continent because of his profession as a flight attendant.  He had the opportunity to spread the virus to his multiple partners in North America.  He wasn't concerned about infecting his partners with the virus.  He gained the term "Patient 0" from scientists.  As far as people were concerned, Dugas had the motive, means, and opportunity to bring the virus to North America.  Worobey et al would have to factor Patient 0 into their experimental designs to either confirm or disprove that idea that he was the source of HIV in North America.

Another problem Worobey and his team had to tackle when they were trying to understand where HIV in North America originated was where their evidence was going to come from.  It wasn't until years after people had been dying from AIDS complications that HIV was discovered as the cause.  Scientists had suggested that HIV was in the US as early as the 1970's but there was no concrete evidence.  How did Worobey et al solve this problem?  Armed with the knowledge that AIDS, and therefore HIV, was mostly found in homosexual males at the beginning of the outbreak, Worobey et al was able to go through over 2,000 blood samples from the 1970's of men who had sex with men in New York City and San Francisco and screen for the HIV virus.  After the HIV virus was extracted, the researchers were able to construct a phylogeny for HIV.  In their phylogeny, Worobey et al included the virus from Patient 0.  Getting this evidence was a huge obstacle the researchers were able to overcome in a revolutionary way.

A detective's case is always stronger when they have more than one type of evidence to corroborate their conclusion.  Worobery and his team had the physical evidence of the HIV virus phylogeny.  Going back through the research on KS, of which Patient 0 was a participant, Worobey et al were able to find their witness statement.  Dugas was part of a cohort of homosexual men with AIDS linked through sexual contact.  He was placed near the center of one sociogram, a graphic representation of social links, and gained the abbreviation Patient O to indicate "Outside of California."  This O was misinterpreted as a zero and the error persisted when the study was published.  The original authors acknowledged their mistake and continue to say that Dugas was probably not the source of AIDS for either the cluster he was a part of or the US epidemic.  

Evidence is nothing if detectives and scientists cannot come to the correct conclusions and communicate them.  What did Worobey and his team conclude?  They found that the HIV virus came to North America from a preexisting Caribbean epidemic.  The first place to be infected in North America was New York City and then the virus dispersed to other places such as California, Pennsylvania, and New Jersey.  Worobey et al also found that the virus infecting Patient 0 was not the ancestral strain in North America, but a more recent one, just as previous researchers said.  Their final conclusion was that Gaetan Dugas did not bring the HIV virus to North America.

The work done by Worobey et al is significant because they were able to take speculation of scientists to get biological evidence of the HIV virus stores in forty year old blood samples that then corroborated with historical data of previous researchers.  All these different evidences were able to come together and tell one story: HIV was transmitted to North America from a previous Caribbean strain around 1972.  The virus then spread and Patient 0, Gaetan Dugas, was infected later.  There is only one true story.  No matter what other people say or claim, evidence only tells the truth.  To know it, both scientists and detectives have to find and listen to it.
